Imagine that you are hired to enable data analytics; where would you start? How would you go about gathering requirements? Hint: Think backward from what the business may need.

If "hired" means a long-term full-time function meant to "do data analytics"
1) Idenitfy the products or services being sold. To start, pick 1-2 high-impact products/services to help drive interest in our analytics product and will also have higher likelihood to demonstrate value.
2) For a particular product/service, work with stakeholders to map out the value stream. What are the sequence and interaction of processes that lead to product/service delivery?
3) Identify IT systems (loosely defined as this could include Excel trackers) involved in these processes and starting mapping out all the data generated in current state
Sort of all in parallel:
4a) Try to get a quick and dirty data model together with current state data - I would be partial to using something like Power BI as I'm familiar with it already. Customer dimension, sales fact, whatever process-related data may be useful, e.g. orders, etc., customer feedback, sales teams / business lines / geographic depts / etc.
4b) Conduct exploratory analysis, try to look for patterns/correlations - try mapping inputs/outputs, eg cost of sales : revenue, sales team resources : # orders, and KPIs that may be concerning / leadership would want to dig into (e.g. steady decreasing customer satisfaction, measurements of waste)
4c) Talk to stakeholders to try to learn about areas of concern / opportunities for improvement. Brainstorm on what data are available and if they can support telling a story to highlight the issue/opportunity
--this is moving out of just requirements gathering...
5) Finalize a report with 1-3 most compelling data stories we were able to dig up from #4, present to stakeholders and leadership. If successful, use buy-in from leadership to get authority and resources to start building out a more permanent and scalable data solution, digitize/modernize processes to produce higher-quality more digestible data, set up automatic ETL orchestrations, etc.
6) Establish continual improvement processes to ensure analytics products continue to meet needs of business, continue to refine and provide new analysis as needed

If "hired" means a short-term consultant for a few weeks or months:
1) Identify who are the inteded consumers of the analytics
2) Talk with those people/teams to understand what are the services they provide / processes they perform. 
3) As part of services/processes, where do they feel is greatest/most impactful lack of visibility / information? What are the key decision-points and what are the inputs into that decision-making - are there opportunities to make those inputs more data-driven?
4) Map out what data exist that could meet identified needs, idenitfy how to query or copy data